---
layout: document
title: Using xRDP for Remote Desktop Access
description: Enabling Remote Desktop Protocol connectivity using xRDP on Ubuntu 14.04 LTS and the xfce window manager.
modified: 2015-12-05 20:15:00
relativeroot: ../../
permalink: documents/xrdp
type: document
tags:
- xRDP
- Remote Desktop
- Linux
category: documents
content-links:
- <a href="#xrdp">xRDP Server</a>
- <a href="#wm">Window Manager</a>
- <a href="#orphans">Killing Orphans</a>
- <a href="#kb">Keyboard Mappings</a>
- <a href="#xterm">XTerm Autocomplete</a>
- <a href="#bell">Disable PC Speaker</a>
- <a href="#references">References & Resources</a>
published: true
---
{{ page.title }}
====================

This document contains the steps for enabling remote desktop access to a linux server using the Remote Desktop Protocol.
The server operating system used here is Ubuntu Server 14.04 LTS.

<a name="xrdp"></a>xRDP Server
----------------------

###Install and Configure xRDP

Install xrdp: `apt-get install xrdp`.

By default, the X11 vnc sessions started through xrdp are not terminated on logout.
With the default configuration, each connection creates a new session which causes X11 sessions to pile up until no more connections are accepted.
To prevent X11 sessions from piling up, make a configuration change to `/etc/xrdp/sesman.ini`.
Add a new parameter with value `-once` in the `[Xvnc]` section, e.g.:

{% highlight bash %}
[Xvnc]
param1=-bs
param2=-ac
param3=-nolisten
param4=tcp
param5=-localhost
param6=-dpi
param7=96
param8=-once
{% endhighlight %}

Enabling connections to existing sessions requires modifying the xRDP source code to use x11vnc instead of xvnc4 as the back-end.
See [this](http://c-nergy.be/blog/?p=4168) post for more information.

###Install and Configure Window Manager

The default window manager gnome [does not work well][How to use xRDP for remote access to Ubuntu 14.04] with RDP on Ubuntu 14.04.
In my case I only get a blank raster background with an X-shaped cursor when using gnome over xRDP and the following errors in `~/.xsession-errors`

{% highlight bash %}
gnome-session[8092]: WARNING: software acceleration check failed: Child process exited with code 1
gnome-session[8092]: CRITICAL: We failed, but the fail whale is dead. Sorry....
{% endhighlight %}

The solution is to use a window manager that does not require acceleration, like Xfce.

- To install xfce, run `apt-get install xfce4`.
- To configure xfce4 for the current user (both local and remote logins), add `xfce4-session` to the file `~/.xsession` (create the file if it does not exist).

The gnome fallback session is sometimes reported to be working, but apparently it is broken on recent Ubuntu versions (I get the same blank raster screen problem as with the default gnome version).

- To install the gnome fallback, run `sudo apt-get install gnome-session-fallback`
- To configure gnome fallback for the current user (both local and remote logins), add `gnome-session --session=gnome-fallback` to the file `~/.xsession` (create the file if it does not exist).

Alternatively, to configure the alternative window manager for all xRDP connections and not local logins, modify `/etc/xrdp/startwm.sh` to start the alternative window manager instead of the default, e.g.:

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/sh  

if [ -r /etc/default/locale ]; then
  . /etc/default/locale
  export LANG LANGUAGE
fi

# Changed xrdp wm to xfce4. Original command:
# . /etc/X11/Xsession
xfce4-session
{% endhighlight %}

###Connecting with RDP

To make sure the configuration changes take effect, restart xrdp: `sudo service xrdp restart`.

Connect using a remote desktop client. In the login screen select module sesman-Xvnc.

<a name="orphans"></a>Killing Orphans
-----------------------

The X11 sessions are still not properly terminated if a user does not log out properly (closes the RDP window) or when the network connection fails.
Also the log-out functionality (at least in xfce) does not always terminate the instance properly (leaving the RDP window open on the client and the session active on the server).
Note that the orphaned sessions aren't cleared even when restarting xrdp.

To find running Xvnc processes, run `ps aux|grep Xvnc`, take note of the PIDs and the display number in the Xvnc command, e.g. 10 in `Xvnc :10 ...`.
The X11 session number range is defined for xrdp in `/etc/xrdp/sesman.ini` (X11DisplayOffset and MaxSession).

{% highlight bash %}
[Sessions]
X11DisplayOffset=10
MaxSession=10
KillDisconnected=0 #This option is currently ignored
IdleTimeLimit=0 #This option is currently ignored
DisconnectedTimeLimit=0 #This option is currently ignored
{% endhighlight %}

To kill the orphan session, kill the process using the pid from the ps command.
In addition, you must remove the session and session lock files.

{% highlight bash %}
sudo kill -9 <pid>
rm /tmp/.X11-unix/X<display>
rm /tmp/.X<display>-lock
{% endhighlight %}

If your system stores the pid of the Xvnc process in `~/.vnc/<host>:<display>.pid`, then you can simply call `vncserver -kill :<display>`.
If not, you'll get the following error when executing the above command:

>Can't find file /home/&lt;user&gt;/.vnc/&lt;host&gt;:&lt;display&gt;.pid   
>You'll have to kill the Xvnc4 process manually

<a name="kb"></a>Keyboard Mappings
-----------------------

Xrdp does not pick up the correct key map by default from the server if the xrdp layout file is not present on the system (for example finnish).

For finnish keyboard layout the easiest way is to [copy][xRDP with finnish keyboard] the swedish keyboard layout as the finnish layout:  
`cp /etc/xrdp/km-041d.ini /etc/xrdp/km-040b.ini`.

Layout ini files can also be [generated][xRDP keyboard layout] if you manage to get the correct layout working manually first.
You can try running `setxkbmap -layout fi` while logged on to the server locally (over xRDP you get the error XKB extension not present on :XX.X)
When the layout is correct in the current session, run `xrdp-genkeymap /etc/xrdp/km-040b.ini`.
The correct code for the file name (040b for finnish) can be found for example on [this][rdesktop keymap names] page.

After the correct layout file is added, logging out and back in with remote desktop should give the correct default key mappings automatically.

<a name="xterm"></a>XTerm Autocomplete
--------------------------

If tab autocomplete doesn't work in xterm in an xfce session over xrdp, then edit the following file:  
`~/.config/xfce4/xfconf/xfce-perchannel-xml/xfce4-keyboard-shortcuts.xml`.

Change  
`<property name="<Super>Tab" type="string" value="switch_window_key"/>`  
to  
`<property name="<Super>Tab" type="empty"/>`

<a name="bell"></a>Disable PC Speaker
---------

By default the pc speaker is enabled, including error sounds from xterm (e.g. too many backspaces or no direct match from tab autocomplete).
This can be really annoying because in an RDP session the beep seems to block all input and takes a long time to complete.

One solution is to disable the pc speaker: run `xset -b` in a terminal after login.
To make the solution permanent, add `[ -n "$DISPLAY"] && xset -b` to `~/.bashrc` (create the file if it does not exist).

<a name="references"></a>References & Resources
---------

- [How to use xRDP for remote access to Ubuntu 14.04]
- [xRDP with finnish keyboard]
- [xRDP keyboard layout]
- [rdesktop keymap names]

[How to use xRDP for remote access to Ubuntu 14.04]: http://www.tweaking4all.com/software/linux-software/use-xrdp-remote-access-ubuntu-14-04/
[xRDP with finnish keyboard]: http://askubuntu.com/questions/290453/xrdp-with-finnish-keyboard
[xRDP keyboard layout]: https://bernatarlandis.wordpress.com/2013/08/09/wrong-keyboard-layout-in-rdp-session-over-debian-gnulinux/
[rdesktop keymap names]: https://github.com/eby/rdesktop/blob/master/doc/keymap-names.txt
